---
layout: post
title: Renode (simulate development boards)
---
Renode is a development framework which accelerates IoT and embedded systems development by letting you simulate physical hardwaresystems  — including both the CPU, peripherals, sensors, environment and wired or wireless medium between nodes.


Renode promises to be able to simulate all kind of boards, like for example the Arduino nano 33 ble sense.
This means that developing software can be much easing, because you do not have to flash the software to be able to test it.

# Install Renode on Linux Mint 20.3
source: https://renode.readthedocs.io/en/latest/introduction/installing.html

* mkdir renode_portable
* download portable release from https://github.com/renode/renode/releases/tag/v1.12.0
* tar xf  renode-*.linux-portable.tar.gz -C renode_portable --strip-components=1

To use it from any location enter the created directory and add it to the system path:

cd renode_portable
export PATH="`pwd`:$PATH"

## Install dependencies
### Mono
* sudo apt install gnupg ca-certificates
sudo apt-key adv --keyserver hkp://keyserver.ubuntu.com:80 --recv-keys 3FA7E0328081BFF6A14DA29AA6A19B38D3D831EF
echo "deb https://download.mono-project.com/repo/ubuntu stable-focal main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/mono-official-stable.list
sudo apt update

### other dependencies
```
sudo apt-get install policykit-1 libgtk2.0-0 screen uml-utilities gtk-sharp2 libc6-dev gcc python3 python3-pip
```

# Using Renode
Start Renode from command line
```renode```
after some seconds a new window (renode monitor appears).
In this window you can give renode commands, like
* mach create #create a machine
* machine LoadPlatformDescription @platforms/boards/arduino_nano_33_ble.repl #load a predefined machine
* logLevel -1 gpio0
* logLevel 3 nvic
* sysbus LoadELF @/tmp/zephyr.elf #load an elf file build for this target machine
* showAnalyzer sysbus.uart0
* s #start simulation of the machine

when I compile Zephyr sample Hello world, even after removing the print statement, I still got warnings
* nvic: Unhandled write to offset 0xD98..0xDA0 
After installing usbip (see below) I don't get any warnings anymore, but also no output on uart0


You can even connect Renode to Arduino SDK, so you can flash from Arduino SDK to virtual machine in Renode
`sudo modprobe vhci_hcd`

You need to install `usbip`: 

```
apt-get install linux-tools-generic
#gives usbip not found for kernel 5.4.0-97
sudo apt install linux-tools-5.4.0-97-generic
sudo apt install linux-cloud-tools-5.4.0-97-generic

#  You may also want to install one of the following packages to keep up to date:
sudo apt install linux-tools-generic
sudo apt install linux-cloud-tools-generic
```


In Renode:
```
(monitor) mach create
(machine-0) machine LoadPlatformDescription @platforms/boards/arduino_nano_33_ble.repl
#Start the USB/IP server in Renode and attach the loader to it:
(machine-0) emulation CreateUSBIPServer
(machine-0) host.usb CreateArduinoLoader sysbus.cpu 0x10000 0 "arduinoLoader"
```
NB: you should use 'normal' double quotes, otherwise you get an error.

(0x10000 in the case of Arduino Nano 33 BLE board), the port through which the bootloader is connected to the host.usb controller (should be changed if you have other devices already connected) and the name of the loader (arduinoLoader in this case)

In Renode:
```
arduinoLoader WaitForBinary 120 true #start the loader
```
Now a password is asked for running usbip as root.
NB: if you don't use a GUI (if you use for instance i3) then the authorization does NOT work. I had to use a GUI (like xfce).

NB: ubuntu has no default root password. To set this do:
$ sudo -i

Type your own password when prompted, and then you will see # prompt. Now you can set up the root user password by typing the following command:
`$passwd`

Now I can build an application in Arduino IDE and "flash" it to Renode.

